---
title: "Exercise 6"
key: "ex06"
---

# Exercise 6

This [problem](http://cryptopals.com/sets/1/challenges/6) is a little more
involved than what we've dealt with so far.  We're presented with a base64
encoded ciphertext, and we're tasked with breaking the encryption and finding
the plaintext. The ciphertext has been encrypted using repeating-key XOR, the
same cryptosystem we implemented in our last exercise.

There's a number of things we need to take care of in order to solve the problem,
let's just start running through it!

```go
package ex06

import (
	"bufio"
	"encoding/base64"
	"fmt"
	"os"
	"sort"

	"../ex04"
)
```


## Keysize

The first thing we'll need to figure out it is the correct `keysize`, defined as
the length of the `[]byte` serving as our key. We have it narrowed down somewhat by
the question text, which tells us we only have to worry about keys with lengths
ranging from 2 to 40.

We'll need one thing before we can get started:

### Hamming distance

The Hamming distance of two `ASCII` strings is defined as the number of bits
at which those two strings differ. We'll need to calculate this metric when we're
trying to figure out the correct keysize.

First, though, here's a little function that takes a byte and returns a count of
the ones in it's binary representation:

```go
func bitCount(b byte) int {
	count := 0
	notOne := ^byte(1)
	for i := byte(0); i < 8; i++ {
		count += int((b >> i) &^ notOne)
	}
	return count
}
```


This just takes a byte (`b`), and then we do some bit-twiddling to check
whether each bit in the byte is a one. First, we negate one (`^byte(1)`) to
get a mask `11111110`. Then we can use the `AND NOT` operator (`&^`) to check
the leftmost bit of `b`. `&^` will return `0` when there is a `1` in it's second
operand, so our mask `11111110` will return `0` everywhere except in the leftmost
position. For `&^`, when the bit in the second argument is `0`, it returns the
corresponding value in the first operand. So if that's a `1`, the value of the
whole expression will be one, and otherwise it will be zero. Then we can convert
that result to an integer, and add that to `count`, and we can loop from 0 to 8
and bit-shift our byte to check each bit. Nice!

How are we going to use that to calculate Hamming distance? Well, we can use bitwise
`XOR` to obtain, for two bytes `b1` and `b2`, the byte `b3` where bits are set to `1`
if `b1` and `b2` had a different value at a given position. Then we can just use
our `bitCount` function to count those up!

```go
func hamming(b1 []byte, b2 []byte) int {
	count := 0
	for i := range b1 {
		count += bitCount(b1[i] ^ b2[i])
	}
	return count
}
```


So how are we going to use this, anyway? Well, the utility of the Hamming
distance function rests on a bit of a wager. We assume that, if \\(k\\) is the
correct keysize, then the average pairwise Hamming distance of the set \\(K\\)
of successive chunks of length \\(k\\) pulled from our ciphertext will be lower
than a randomly-chosen keysize.  So in order to find the right keysize, we'll
need to iterate through the range of possible keysizes and, for each keysize,
chop up our ciphertext into chunks of that size and record the average pairwise
Hamming distance. Then, the keysize with the lowest average should be correct!

First, let's write a little function that takes a keysize and a `[]byte`, and chunks
it up properly!

```go
func chunks(k int, bytes []byte) [][]byte {
	out := [][]byte{}
	tmp := []byte{}
	for i := 0; i < len(bytes); i++ {
		if i%k == 0 && i != 0 {
			out = append(out, tmp)
			tmp = []byte{}
		}
		tmp = append(tmp, bytes[i])
	}
	out = append(out, tmp)
	return out
}
```


Now, a function that takes a keysize and a ciphertext, and returns the average pairwise
Hamming distance, normalized by `keysize`:

```go
func keysizeDistance(keysize int, bytes []byte) float64 {
	chunked := chunks(keysize, bytes)
	distance := 0
	for _, chunk := range chunked {
		distance += hamming(chunk, chunked[0])
	}
	average := float64(distance) / float64(len(chunked))
	return average / float64(keysize)
}
```


With the above function we should be able to figure out the correct keysize -
this is a question of simply iterating though the range of possible keysizes
(\\(\{a, ..., b\}\\)), determining the `keysizeDistance` score for each, and
then taking the smallest result to be \\(k\\), our keysize. Let's write another
little function that does that for us:

```go
func keySize(lower, upper int, bytes []byte) int {
	scores := make(map[int]float64)
	for i := lower; i <= upper; i++ {
		scores[i] = keysizeDistance(i, bytes)
	}
	lowestScore := 0.0
	keysize := -1
	for k, v := range scores {
		if v < lowestScore || lowestScore == 0.0 {
			lowestScore = v
			keysize = k
		}
	}
	return keysize
}
```


Ok, so we've now got a function that will (hopefully!) let us figure out the
length of the key. What can we go with that?

## Solving the problem

Basically, what we're going to take that keysize, use it to break up our
ciphertext into blocks which are encrypted under the same byte, and then find
each of those bytes using the same methodology we used to break single byte XOR
in exercise 04. Then, once we've figured out the correct byte for each byte of
the key, we can simply decrypt the message! Nice!


We'll need a few utility functions. First, a little function to split up a byte
slice into slices based on the index modulo keysize of the elements:

```go
func splitByModulo(size int, bytes []byte) [][]byte {
	out := [][]byte{}
	for i := 0; i < size; i++ {
		out = append(out, []byte{})
	}
	for i, b := range bytes {
		out[i%size] = append(out[i%size], b)
	}
	return out
}
```


While we're at it, here's another utility function that just reads in the file
for the exercise:

```go
func readExerciseInput() []byte {
	f, _ := os.Open("./ex06.txt")

	input := bufio.NewScanner(f)
	lines := []byte{}

	for input.Scan() {
		line, _ := base64.StdEncoding.DecodeString(input.Text())
		for _, c := range line {
			lines = append(lines, byte(c))
		}
	}
	return lines
}
```


Then to find the correct key we just need to break single-byte XOR for each
modulo chunk, and we can build up our key byte-by-byte. We'll use `BreakXOR`
from our exercise 04 solution, and then just return the correct key:

```go
func FindKey(bytes []byte) []byte {
	size := keySize(2, 40, bytes)
	splits := splitByModulo(size, bytes)
	key := []byte{}
	for _, split := range splits {
		results := ex04.BreakXOR(split)
		sort.Sort(results)
		key = append(key, results[0].Key)
	}
	return key
}
```


Once we can find a key we're on our way! Now all we need to do is XOR the key
with the ciphertext, and we're golden!

```go
func solution() {
	cipherText := readExerciseInput()
	key := FindKey(cipherText)

	plainText := []byte{}
	for i, c := range cipherText {
		plainText = append(plainText, c^key[i%len(key)])
	}
	fmt.Printf("\nthe key was '%s', and the plaintext:\n\n", string(key))
	fmt.Println(string(plainText))
}
```
