---
layout: post
title: RC Day 8!
date: 2015-06-05T10:14:12-04:00
---

My blog entries are getting later and later...

On day 8 (yesterday) I worked on a couple of things. When I got to RC my
laptop decided it really didn't want to connect to the wireless network.
After 45 minutes of restarting the machine, stopping and restarting
NetworkManager.service, and staring at dmesg and journalctl I gave up and
just used my phone as a hotspot (luckily I didn't have to download
anything large). Then when I tried connecting to the RC wireless again
a couple hours later, it mysteriously worked. Ghosts in my computer? The
NSA? No idea.

Anyway, I mainly worked on C related things. I designed a solution to the
Matasano challenge no. 3, and wrote most of the library I need for it.
I hope to finish that up today! It's kind of a fun thing, but if I get it
working I want to present on it next week so I don't want to spoil.

I also resubmitted Eudyptula task 03 (oopsie I didn't format my email
correctly), and read the section about pointers and arrays in K&R. I feel
like I'm getting a much better handle on how to write C code in a way that
uses the potential of the language more, rather than just translating
design patterns that would be appropriate for OOP into it. 

Today I hope to finish Cryptopals task 03 (and have someone take a look at
the design of my solution), read more K&R, and start the Stanford
cryptography Coursera course (I signed up on Monday but haven't forced
myself to start watching videos yet). We'll see!
