---
title: RC Days 10 and 11
date: 2015-06-09T14:43:50-04:00
layout: post
---

Late again! Oh well.

Yesterday I started working on solving cryptopals problem 4, which has
proved tricky so far. I tried an approach yesterday, which hasn't worked
yet, and I also tried another strategy today. Hopefully tomorrow I'll make
it work! It's encouraging to think that during the first week I struggled
to just get the XOR program working!

Yesterday I also watched some of the videos for the crypto course, and
spent a ton of time trying to compile and run TextSecure from source.
I was trying to get it to use a build option for a debug mode, so that
I can try out the
[TextSecure](https://github.com/WhisperSystems/TextSecure-Browser)
chromium extension which is currently under development. I think I might
need to do this on real hardware? I need access to the camera in order to
pair the two things. It also turns out that you can't install two versions
of the same app on one phone (I think) so the debugTest build won't
install to my phone over the release TextSecure build from the Play store.
Which is probably good, things that keep me from messing up the devices
I actually need to use are kind of helpful!

On Tuesday I watched more crypto course videos, worked on Matasano task04,
and also picked back up my git visualization project. Initially my goal
with that was to print out the commit tree without depending on any
libraries or other programs (besides git) but I may try to be a little
more pragmatic - I'm thinking of writing it in Python to make it easier on
myself too.

That's it!
